                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY




               9    The Relevance of Algorithms


               Tarleton Gillespie




               Algorithms play an increasingly important role in selecting what informa-
               tion is considered most relevant to us, a crucial feature of our participation
               in public life. Search engines help us navigate massive databases of infor-
               mation, or the entire web. Recommendation algorithms map our prefer-
               ences against others, suggesting new or forgotten bits of culture for us to
               encounter. Algorithms manage our interactions on social networking sites,
               highlighting the news of one friend while excluding another’s. Algorithms
               designed to calculate what is “hot” or “trending” or “most discussed” skim
               the cream from the seemingly boundless chatter that’s on offer. Together,
               these algorithms not only help us find information, they also provide a
               means to know what there is to know and how to know it, to participate in
               social and political discourse, and to familiarize ourselves with the publics
               in which we participate. They are now a key logic governing the flows of
               information on which we depend, with the “power to enable and assign
               meaningfulness, managing how information is perceived by users, the ‘dis-
               tribution of the sensible.’” (Langlois 2013)
                  Algorithms need not be software: in the broadest sense, they are encoded
               procedures for transforming input data into a desired output, based on
               specified calculations. The procedures name both a problem and the steps
               by which it should be solved. Instructions for navigation may be considered
               an algorithm, or the mathematical formulas required to predict the move-
               ment of a celestial body across the sky. “Algorithms do things, and their
               syntax embodies a command structure to enable this to happen” (Goffey
               2008, 17). We might think of computers, then, fundamentally as algorithm
               machines—designed to store and read data, apply mathematical procedures
               to it in a controlled fashion, and offer new information as the output. But
               these are procedures that could conceivably be done by hand—and in fact
               were (Light 1999).




9042_009.indd 167                                                                               8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               168                                                                Tarleton Gillespie



                   But as we have embraced computational tools as our primary media of
               expression, and have made not just mathematics but all information digi-
               tal, we are subjecting human discourse and knowledge to these procedural
               logics that undergird all computation. And there are specific implications
               when we use algorithms to select what is most relevant from a corpus of
               data composed of traces of our activities, preferences, and expressions.
                   These algorithms, which I'll call public relevance algorithms, are—by the
               very same mathematical procedures—producing and certifying knowledge.
               The algorithmic assessment of information, then, represents a particular
               knowledge logic, one built on specific presumptions about what knowledge
               is and how one should identify its most relevant components. That we are
               now turning to algorithms to identify what we need to know is as momen-
               tous as having relied on credentialed experts, the scientific method, com-
               mon sense, or the word of God.
                   What we need is an interrogation of algorithms as a key feature of our
               information ecosystem (Anderson 2011), and of the cultural forms emerg-
               ing in their shadows (Striphas 2010), with a close attention to where and in
               what ways the introduction of algorithms into human knowledge practices
               may have political ramifications. This essay is a conceptual map to do just
               that. I will highlight six dimensions of public relevance algorithms that
               have political valence:

               1. Patterns of inclusion: the choices behind what makes it into an index in
               the first place, what is excluded, and how data is made algorithm ready.
               2. Cycles of anticipation: the implications of algorithm providers’ attempts
               to thoroughly know and predict their users, and how the conclusions they
               draw can matter.
               3. The evaluation of relevance: the criteria by which algorithms determine
               what is relevant, how those criteria are obscured from us, and how they
               enact political choices about appropriate and legitimate knowledge.
               4. The promise of algorithmic objectivity: the way the technical character of
               the algorithm is positioned as an assurance of impartiality, and how that
               claim is maintained in the face of controversy.
               5. Entanglement with practice: how users reshape their practices to suit the
               algorithms they depend on, and how they can turn algorithms into ter-
               rains for political contest, sometimes even to interrogate the politics of the
               algorithm itself.
               6. The production of calculated publics: how the algorithmic presentation of
               publics back to themselves shape a public’s sense of itself, and who is best
               positioned to benefit from that knowledge.




9042_009.indd 168                                                                                      8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               The Relevance of Algorithms                                                   169



               Considering how fast these technologies and the uses to which they are put
               are changing, this list must be taken as provisional, not exhaustive. But as
               I see it, these are the most important lines of inquiry into understanding
               algorithms as emerging tools of public knowledge and discourse.
                  It would also be seductively easy to get this wrong. In attempting to say
               something of substance about the way algorithms are shifting our public
               discourse, we must firmly resist putting the technology in the explanatory
               driver’s seat. While recent sociological study of the Internet has labored to
               undo the simplistic technological determinism that plagued earlier work,
               that determinism remains an alluring analytical stance. A sociological anal-
               ysis must not conceive of algorithms as abstract, technical achievements,
               but must unpack the warm human and institutional choices that lie behind
               these cold mechanisms. I suspect that a more fruitful approach will turn as
               much to the sociology of knowledge as to the sociology of technology—to
               see how these tools are called into being by, enlisted as part of, and nego-
               tiated around collective efforts to know and be known. This might help
               reveal that the seemingly solid algorithm is in fact a fragile accomplish-
               ment. It also should remind us that algorithms are now a communication
               technology; like broadcasting and publishing technologies, they are now
               “the scientific instruments of a society at large,” (Gitelman 2006, 5) and are
               caught up in and are influencing the ways in which we ratify knowledge for
               civic life, but in ways that are more “protocological” (Galloway 2004), in
               other words, organized computationally, than any medium before.

               Patterns of Inclusion

               Algorithms are inert, meaningless machines until paired with databases on
               which to function. A sociological inquiry into an algorithm must always
               grapple with the databases to which it is wedded; failing to do so would be
               akin to studying what was said at a public protest, while failing to notice
               that some speakers had been stopped at the park gates.
                  For users, algorithms and databases are conceptually conjoined: users
               typically treat them as a single, working apparatus. And in the eyes of the
               market, the creators of the database and the providers of the algorithm are
               often one and the same, or are working in economic and often ideological
               concert. “Together, data structures and algorithms are two halves of the
               ontology of the world according to a computer” (Manovich 1999, 84). Nev-
               ertheless, we can treat the two as analytically distinct: before results can be
               algorithmically provided, information must be collected, readied for the
               algorithm, and sometimes excluded or demoted.




9042_009.indd 169                                                                                  8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               170                                                                Tarleton Gillespie



               Collection
               We live in a historical moment in which, more than ever before, nearly all
               public activity includes keeping copious records, cataloging activity, and
               archiving documents—and we do more and more of it on a communica-
               tion network designed such that every login, every page view, and every
               click leaves a digital trace. Turning such traces into databases involves a
               complex array of information practices (Stalder and Mayer 2009): Google,
               for example, crawls the web indexing websites and their metadata. It digi-
               tizes real-world information, from library collections to satellite images to
               comprehensive photo records of city streets. It invites users to provide per-
               sonal and social details as part of their Google+ profile. It keeps exhaustive
               logs of every search query entered and every result clicked. It adds local
               information based on each user’s computer’s data. It stores the traces of
               web surfing practices gathered through their massive advertising networks.
                  Understanding what is included in such databases requires an attention
               to the collection policies of information services, but should also extend
               beyond to the actual practices involved. This is not just to spot cases of
               malfeasance, though there are some, but to understand how an informa-
               tion provider thinks about the data collection it undertakes. The political
               resistance to Google’s StreetView project in Germany and India reminds us
               that the answer to the question, “What does this street corner look like?”
               has different implications for those who want to go there, those who live
               there, and those who believe that the answer should not be available in
               such a public way. But it also reveals what Google thinks of as “public,” an
               interpretation that is being widely deployed across their service.

               Readied for the Algorithm
               “Raw data is an oxymoron” (Gitelman and Jackson 2013). Data is both
               already desiccated and persistently messy. Nevertheless, there is a premedi-
               tated order necessary for algorithms to even work. More than anything,
               algorithms are designed to be—and prized for being—functionally auto-
               matic, to act when triggered without any regular human intervention or
               oversight (Winner 1977). This means that the information included in the
               database must be rendered into data, formalized so that algorithms can act
               on it automatically. Data must be “imagined and enunciated against the
               seamlessness of phenomena” (Gitelman and Jackson 2013). Recognizing
               the ways in which data must be “cleaned up” is an important counter to
               the seeming automaticity of algorithms. Just as one can know something
               about sculptures from studying their inverted molds, algorithms can be




9042_009.indd 170                                                                                      8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               The Relevance of Algorithms                                                   171



               understood by looking closely at how information must be oriented to face
               them, how it is made algorithm ready.
                   In the earliest database architectures, information was organized in
               strict and, as it turned out, inflexible hierarchies. Since the development
               of relational and object-oriented database architectures, information can
               be organized in more flexible ways, where bits of data can have multiple
               associations with other bits of data, categories can change over time, and
               data can be explored without having to navigate or even understand the
               hierarchical structure by which it is archived. The sociological implications
               of database design has largely been overlooked; the genres of databases
               themselves have inscribed politics, as well as making algorithms essential
               information tools. As Rieder (2012) notes, with the widespread uptake of
               relational databases comes a “relational ontology” that understands data
               as atomized, “regular, uniform, and only loosely connected objects that
               can be ordered in a potentially unlimited number of ways at the time of
               retrieval,” thereby shifting expressive power from the structural design of
               the database to the query.
                   Even with these more flexible forms of databases, categorization remains
               vitally important to database design and management. Categorization is a
               powerful semantic and political intervention: what the categories are, what
               belongs in a category, and who decides how to implement these categories
               in practice, are all powerful assertions about how things are and are sup-
               posed to be (Bowker and Star 2000). Once instituted, a category draws a
               demarcation that will be treated with reverence by an approaching algo-
               rithm. A useful example here is the #amazonfail incident. In 2009, more
               than fifty-seven thousand gay-friendly books disappeared in an instant
               from Amazon’s sales lists, because they had been accidentally categorized
               as “adult.” Naturally, complex information systems are prone to error. But
               this particular error also revealed that Amazon’s algorithm calculating “sales
               rank” is instructed to ignore books designated as adult. Even when mistakes
               are not made, whatever criteria Amazon uses to determine adult-ness are
               being applied and reified—apparent only in the unexplained absence of
               some books and the presence of others.

               Exclusion and Demotion
               Though all database producers share an appetite for gathering informa-
               tion, they are made distinctive more by what they choose to exclude. “The
               archive, by remembering all and only a certain set of facts / discoveries /
               observations, consistently and actively engages in the forgetting of other
               sets. . . . The archive's jussive force, then, operates through being invisibly




9042_009.indd 171                                                                                  8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               172                                                                Tarleton Gillespie



               exclusionary. The invisibility is an important feature here: the archive pres-
               ents itself as being the set of all possible statements, rather than the law of
               what can be said.” (Bowker 2006, 12–14). Even in the current conditions
               of digital abundance (Keane 1999), in which it is cheaper and easier to
               err on the side of keeping information rather than not, there is always a
               remainder.
                  Sites can, themselves, refuse to allow data collectors (like search engines)
               to index their sites. Elmer (2009) reveals that robot.txt, a bit of code that
               prevents search engines from indexing a page or site, though designed ini-
               tially as a tool for preserving the privacy of individual creators, has since
               been used by government institutions to “redact” otherwise public docu-
               ments from public scrutiny. But beyond self-exclusion, some information
               initially collected is subsequently removed before an algorithm ever gets
               to it. Though large-scale information services pride themselves on being
               comprehensive, these sites are and always must be censors as well. Indexes
               are culled of spam and viruses, patrolled for copyright infringement and
               pornography, and scrubbed of the obscene, the objectionable, or the politi-
               cally contentious (Gillespie forthcoming).
                  Offending content can simply be removed from the index, or an account
               suspended, before it ever reaches another user. But, in tandem with an algo-
               rithm, problematic content can be handled in more subtle ways. YouTube
               “algorithmically demotes” suggestive videos, so they do not appear on lists
               of the most watched, or on the home page generated for new users. Twitter
               does not censor profanity from public tweets, but it does remove it from
               their algorithmic evaluation of which terms are “Trending.”
                  The particular patterns whereby information is either excluded from a
               database, or included and then managed in particular ways, are reminiscent
               of twentieth-century debates (Tushnet 2008) about the ways choices made
               by commercial media about who is systematically left out and what catego-
               ries of speech simply don’t qualify can shape the diversity and character
               of public discourse. Whether enacted by a newspaper editor or by a search
               engine’s indexing tools, these choices help establish and confirm standards
               of viable debate, legitimacy, and decorum. But here, the algorithms can be
               touted as automatic, while it is the patterns of inclusion that predetermine
               what will or will not appear among their results.

               Cycles of Anticipation

               Search algorithms determine what to serve up based on input from the user.
               But most platforms now make it their business to know much, much more




9042_009.indd 172                                                                                      8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               The Relevance of Algorithms                                                   173



               about the user than the query she just entered. Sites hope to anticipate the
               user at the moment the algorithm is called on, which requires knowledge of
               that user gleaned at that instant, knowledge of that user already gathered,
               and knowledge of users estimated to be statistically and demographically
               like them (Beer 2009)—drawing together what Stalder and Mayer (2009)
               call the “second index.” If broadcasters were providing not just content to
               audiences but also audiences to advertisers (Smythe 2001), digital provid-
               ers are not just providing information to users but also users to their algo-
               rithms. And algorithms are made and remade in every instance of their use
               because every click, every query, changes the tool incrementally.
                   Much of the scholarship about the data collection and tracking practices
               of contemporary information providers has focused on the significant pri-
               vacy concerns they provoke. Zimmer (2008) argues that search engines now
               not only aspire to relentlessly index the web but also to develop “perfect
               recall” of all of their users. To do this, information providers must not just
               track their users, they must also build technical infrastructures and busi-
               ness models that link individual sites into a suite of services (like Google’s
               many tools and services) or an even broader ecosystem (as with Facebook’s
               “social graph” and its “like” buttons scattered across the web), and then cre-
               ate incentives for users to remain within it. This allows the provider to be
               “passive-aggressive” (Berry 2012) in how it assembles information gathered
               across many sites into a coherent and increasingly comprehensive profile.
               Providers also take advantage of the increasingly participatory ethos of the
               web, where users are powerfully encouraged to volunteer all sorts of infor-
               mation about themselves, and encouraged to feel powerful doing so. As
               our micropractices migrate more and more to these platforms, it is seduc-
               tive (though not obligatory) for information providers to both track and
               commodify that activity in a variety of ways (Gillespie and Postigo 2012).
               Moreover, users may be unaware that their activity across the web is being
               tracked by the biggest online advertisers, and they are have little or no
               means to challenge this arrangement even if they do (Turow 2012).
                   Yet privacy is not the only politically relevant concern. In these cycles
               of anticipation, it is the bits of information that are most legible to the
               algorithm, and thus tend to stand in for those users. What Facebook knows
               about its users is a great deal; but still, it knows only what it is able to know.
               The most knowable information (geolocation, computing platform, profile
               information, friends, status updates, links followed on the site, time on the
               site, activity on other sites that host “like” buttons or cookies) is a render-
               ing of that user, a “digital dossier” (Solove 2004) or “algorithmic identity”
               (Cheney-Lippold 2011) that is imperfect but sufficient. What is less legible




9042_009.indd 173                                                                                   8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               174                                                                Tarleton Gillespie



               or cannot be known about users falls away or is bluntly approximated. As
               Balka (2011) described it, information systems produce “shadow bodies” by
               emphasizing some aspects of their subjects and overlooking others. These
               shadow bodies persist and proliferate through information systems, and
               the slippage between the anticipated user and the user themselves that they
               represent can be either politically problematic, or politically productive.
                   But algorithms are not always about exhaustive prediction; sometimes
               they are about sufficient approximation. Perhaps just as important as the
               surveillance of users are the conclusions providers are willing to draw based
               on relatively little information about them. Hunch.com, a content rec-
               ommendation service, boasted that they could know a user’s preferences
               with 80–85 percent accuracy based on the answers to just five questions.
               While this radically boils down the complexity of a person to five points
               on a graph, what’s important is that this is sufficient accuracy for their pur-
               poses.1 Because such sites are comfortable catering to these user caricatures,
               the questions that appear to sort us most sufficiently, particularly around
               our consumer preferences, are likely to grow in significance as public mea-
               sures. And to some degree, we are invited to formalize ourselves into these
               knowable categories. When we encounter these providers, we are encour-
               aged to choose from the menus they offer, so as to be correctly anticipated
               by the system and provided the right information, the right recommenda-
               tions, the right people.
                   Beyond knowing the personal and the demographic details about each
               user, information providers conduct a great deal of research trying to under-
               stand, and then operationalize, how humans habitually seek, engage with,
               and digest information. Most notably in the study of human–computer
               interaction (HCI), the understanding of human psychology and perception
               is brought to bear on the design of algorithms and the ways in which their
               results should be represented. Designers hope to anticipate users’ psycho-
               physiological capabilities and tendencies, not just specific users’ preferences
               and habits. But in these anticipations, too, implicit and sometimes political
               valences can be inscribed in the technology (Sterne 2003): the perceptual
               or interpretive habits of some users are taken to be universal, contempo-
               rary habits are imagined to be timeless, particular computational goals are
               assumed to be self-evident.
                   We are also witnessing a new kind of information power, gathered in
               these enormous databases of user activity and preference, which is itself
               reshaping the political landscape. Regardless of their techniques, informa-
               tion providers who amass this data, third-party industries who gather and




9042_009.indd 174                                                                                      8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               The Relevance of Algorithms                                                   175



               purchase user data as a commodity for them, and those who traffic in user
               data for other reasons (that is, credit card companies), have a stronger voice
               because of it, in both the marketplace and in the halls of legislative power,
               and are increasingly involving themselves in political debates about con-
               sumer safeguards and digital rights. We are seeing the deployment of data
               mining in the arenas of political organizing (Howard 2005), journalism
               (Anderson 2011), and publishing (Striphas 2009), where the secrets drawn
               from massive amounts of user data are taken as compelling guidelines for
               future content production, be it the next microtargeted campaign ad or the
               next pop phenomenon.

               The Evaluation of Relevance

               When users click “Search,” or load their Facebook News Feed, or ask for rec-
               ommendations from Netflix, algorithms must instantly and automatically
               identify which of the trillions of bits of information best meets the criteria
               at hand, and will best satisfy a specific user and his presumed aims. While
               these calculations have never been simple, they have grown more com-
               plex as the public use of these services has matured. Search algorithms, for
               example, once based on simply tallying how often the actual search terms
               appear in the indexed web pages, now incorporate contextual information
               about the sites and their hosts, consider how often the site is linked to by
               others and in what ways, and enlist natural language processing techniques
               to better “understand” both the query and the resources that the algorithm
               might return in response. According to Google, its search algorithm exam-
               ines over two hundred signals for every query.2
                  These signals are the means by which the algorithm approximates “rele-
               vance.” But here is where sociologists of algorithms must firmly plant their
               feet: “relevant” is a fluid and loaded judgment, as open to interpretation
               as some of the evaluative terms media scholars have already unpacked, like
               “newsworthy” or “popular.” As there is no independent metric for what
               actually are the most relevant search results for any given query, engineers
               must decide what results look “right” and tweak their algorithm to attain
               that result, or make changes based on evidence from their users, treating
               quick clicks and no follow-up searches as an approximation, not of rel-
               evance exactly, but of satisfaction. To accuse an algorithm of bias implies
               that there exists an unbiased judgment of relevance available, to which
               the tool is failing to hew. Since no such measure is available, disputes over
               algorithmic evaluations have no solid ground to fall back on.




9042_009.indd 175                                                                                  8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               176                                                                Tarleton Gillespie



               Criteria
               To be able to say that a particular algorithm makes evaluative assumptions,
               the kind that have consequences for human knowledge endeavors, might
               call for a critical analysis of the algorithm to interrogate its underlying cri-
               teria. But in nearly all cases, such evaluative criteria are hidden, and must
               remain so. Twitter’s Trends algorithm, which reports to the user what terms
               are trending at that moment in their area, even leaves the definition of
               “trending” unspecified. The criteria they use to assess “trendiness” are only
               described in general terms: the velocity of a certain term’s surge, whether it
               has appeared in Twitter’s Trend list before, and whether it circulates within
               or spans across clusters of users. What is unstated is how these criteria are
               measured, how they are weighed against one another, what other criteria
               have also been incorporated, and when if ever these criteria will be over-
               ridden. This leaves algorithms perennially open to user suspicion that their
               criteria skew to the provider’s commercial or political benefit, or incorpo-
               rate embedded, unexamined assumptions that act below the level of aware-
               ness, even that of the designers (Gillespie 2012).
                  An information provider like Twitter cannot be much more explicit or
               precise about its algorithms’ workings. To do so would give competitors an
               easy means of duplicating and surpassing its service. It would also require
               a more technical explanation than most users are prepared for. It would
               hamper their ability to change their criteria as they need. But most of all, it
               would hand those who hope to “game the system” a road map for getting
               their sites to the top of the search results or their hashtags to appear on
               the Trends list. While some collaborative recommendation sites like Reddit
               have made public their algorithms for ranking stories and user comments,
               these sites must constantly seek out and correct instances of organized
               downvoting, and these tactics cannot be made public. With a few excep-
               tions, the tendency is strongly toward being oblique.3

               Commercial Aims
               A second approach might entail a careful consideration of the economic
               and the cultural contexts from which the algorithm came. Any knowledge
               system emerges amid the economic and political aims of information pro-
               vision, and will be shaped by the aims and strategies of those powerful
               institutions looking to capitalize on it (Hesmondhalgh 2006). The pressures
               faced by search engines, content platforms, and information providers
               can subtly shape the design of the algorithm itself and the presentation
               of its results (Vaidhyanathan 2011). As the algorithm comes to stand as a
               legitimate knowledge logic, new commercial endeavors are fitted to it (for




9042_009.indd 176                                                                                      8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               The Relevance of Algorithms                                                   177



               instance, search engine optimization), reifying choices made and forcing
               additional ones.
                  For example, early critics worried that search engines would offer up
               advertisements in the form of links or featured content, presented as the
               product of algorithmic calculations. The rapid and clear public rejection of
               this ploy demonstrated how strong our trust in these algorithms is: users
               did not wish the content that providers wanted us to see for financial rea-
               sons to be intermingled with content that the provider had algorithmically
               selected. But the concern is now multidimensional: the landscape of the
               Facebook News Feed, for example, can no longer be described as two dis-
               tinct territories, social and commercial; rather, it interweaves the results of
               algorithmic calculations (what status updates and other activities of friends
               should be listed in the feed, what links will be recommended to this user,
               which friends are actively on the site at the moment), structural elements
               (tools for contributing a status update, commenting on an information ele-
               ment, links to groups and pages), and elements placed there based on a
               sponsorship relationship (banner ads, apps from third-party sites). To map
               this complex terrain requires a deep understanding of the economic rela-
               tionships and social assumptions it represents.

               Epistemological Premises
               Finally, we must consider if the evaluative criteria of the algorithm are
               structured by specific political or organizational principles that themselves
               have political ramifications. This is not just whether an algorithm might be
               partial to this or that provider or might favor its own commercial interests
               over others. It is a question of whether the philosophical presumptions
               about relevant knowledge on which the algorithm is founded matter. Some
               early scholarship looking at the biases of search engines (in order of publi-
               cation, Introna and Nissenbaum 2000; Halavais 2008; Rogers 2009; Granka
               2010) noted some structural tendencies toward what’s already popular,
               toward English-language sites, and toward commercial information provid-
               ers. Legal scholars debating what it would mean to require neutrality in
               search results (Grimmelmann 2010; Pasquale and Bracha 2008) have meant
               more than just the inability to tip results toward a commercial partner.
                  The criteria public information algorithms take into account are myr-
               iad; each is fitted with a threshold for what will push something up in
               the results, position one result above another, and so on. So evaluations
               performed by algorithms always depend on inscribed assumptions about
               what matters, and how what matters can be identified. When a primitive
               search engine counted the number of appearances of a search term on the




9042_009.indd 177                                                                                  8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               178                                                                Tarleton Gillespie



               web pages it had indexed, it reified a particular logic, one that assumed that
               pages that include the queried term were likely to be relevant to someone
               interested in that term. When Google developed PageRank, factoring in
               incoming links to a page as evidence of its value, it built in a different
               logic: a page with many incoming links, from high-quality sites, is seen as
               “ratified” by other users, and is more likely to be relevant to this user as
               well. By preferring incoming links from sites themselves perceived to be of
               high-quality, Finkelstein notes, Google had shifted from a more populist
               approach to a “shareholder democracy”: “One link is not one vote, but it
               has influence proportional to the relative power (in terms of popularity) of
               the voter. Because blocks of common interests, or social factions, can affect
               the results of a search to a degree depending on their relative weight in
               the network, the results of the algorithmic calculation by a search engine
               come to reflect political struggles in society” (Finkelstein 2008, 107). When
               a news discussion site decides what ratio of negative complaints to number
               of views is sufficient to justify automatically hiding a comment thread, it
               represents their assessment of the proper volatility of public discourse, or at
               least the volatility they prefer, for the user community they think they have
               (Braun 2011). A great deal of expertise and judgment can be embedded in
               these cognitive artifacts (Hutchins 1995; Latour 1986), but it is judgment
               that is then submerged and automated.
                  Most users do not dwell on algorithmic criteria, tending to treat them as
               unproblematic tools in the service of a larger activity: finding an answer,
               solving a problem, being entertained. However, while the technology may
               be “blackboxed” (Latour 1987; Pinch and Bijker 1984) by designers and
               users alike, that should not lead us to believe that it remains stable. In fact,
               algorithms can be easily, instantly, radically, and invisibly changed. While
               major upgrades may happen only on occasion, algorithms are regularly
               being “tweaked.” Changes can occur without the interface to the algo-
               rithm changing in the slightest: the Facebook news feed and search bar
               may look the same as they did yesterday, while the evaluations going on
               beneath them have been thoroughly remade. The blackbox metaphor fails
               us here, as the workings of the algorithm are both obscured and malleable,
               “likely so dynamic that a snapshot of them would give us little chance of
               assessing their biases” (Pasquale 2009). In fact, what we might refer to as
               an algorithm is often not one algorithm but many. Search engines like
               Google regularly engage in “A/B” testing,4 presenting different rankings
               to different subsets of users to gain on-the-fly data on speed and customer
               satisfaction, then incorporating the adjustments preferred by users in a
               subsequent upgrade.




9042_009.indd 178                                                                                      8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               The Relevance of Algorithms                                                   179



                  Each algorithm is premised on both an assumption about the proper
               assessment of relevance, and an instantiation of that assumption into a
               technique for (computational) evaluation. There may be implicit premises
               built into a site’s idea of relevance, there may be shortcuts built into its
               technical instantiation of that idea, and there may be friction between the
               two.

               The Promise of Algorithmic Objectivity

               More than mere tools, algorithms are also stabilizers of trust, practical and
               symbolic assurances that their evaluations are fair and accurate, and free
               from subjectivity, error, or attempted influence. But, though algorithms
               may appear to be automatic and untarnished by the interventions of their
               providers, this is a carefully crafted fiction. “Search engines pride them-
               selves on being automated, except when they aren’t.” (Grimmelmann
               2008, 950) In fact, no information service can be completely hands-off in
               its delivery of information: though an algorithm may evaluate any site as
               most relevant to your query, that result will not appear if it is child pornog-
               raphy, it will not appear in China if it is dissident political speech, and it
               will not appear in France if it promotes Nazism. Yet it’s very important for
               the providers of these algorithms that they seem hands-off. The legitimacy
               of these functioning mechanisms must be performed alongside the provi-
               sion of information itself.
                   The articulations offered by the algorithm provider alongside its tool are
               meant to provide what Pfaffenberger (1992) calls “logonomic control,”
               to define the tool within the practices of users, to bestow the tool with a
               legitimacy that then carries to the information provided and, by proxy, the
               provider. The careful articulation of an algorithm as impartial (even when
               that characterization is more obfuscation than explanation) certifies it as a
               reliable sociotechnical actor, lends its results relevance and credibility, and
               maintains the provider’s apparent neutrality in the face of the millions of
               evaluations it makes. This articulation of the algorithm is just as crucial to
               its social life as its material design and its economic obligations.
                   It is largely up to the provider to describe its algorithm as being of a
               particular shape, having therefore a certain set of values, and thus confer-
               ring to it some kind of legitimacy. This includes carefully characterizing
               the tool and its value to a variety of audiences, sometimes in a variety of
               ways: an algorithm can be defended as a tool for impartial evaluation to
               those critical of its results, and at the same time be promised as a tool for
               selective promotion to potential advertisers (Gillespie 2010). As Mackenzie




9042_009.indd 179                                                                                  8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               180                                                                Tarleton Gillespie



               (2005) observes, this process requires more than a single, full-throated
               description: it depends both on “repetition and citation” (81) and at the
               same time requires “the ‘covering over’ of the ‘authoritative set of practices’
               that lend it force.” (82) When an information provider finds itself criticized
               for the results it provides, the legitimacy of its algorithm must be repaired
               both discursively and technically. And users are complicit in this: “A soci-
               ety that obsesses over the top Google News results has made those results
               important, and we are ill-advised to assume the reverse (that the results are
               obsessed over because they are important) without some narrative account
               of why the algorithm is superior to, say, the ‘news judgment’ of editors at
               traditional media” (Pasquale 2009).
                   This articulation happens first in the presentation of the tool, in its
               deployment within a broader information service. Calling them “results”
               or “best” or “top stories” or “trends” speaks not only to what the algorithm
               is actually measuring, but also to what it should be understood as measur-
               ing. An equally important part of this discursive work comes in the form
               of describing how the algorithm works. Even what may seem like a clear
               explanation of a behind-the-scenes process is not actually a glimpse of a
               real backstage process, but a “performed backstage” (Hilgartner 2000), care-
               fully crafted to further legitimize the process and its results. The description
               of Google’s PageRank system, the earliest component of its complex search
               algorithm, was published first as a technical paper (already a crafted rendi-
               tion of its mathematical workings), but was subsequently mythologized—
               as the defining feature of the tool, as the central element that made Google
               stand out above its then competitors, and as a fundamentally democratic
               computational logic—even as the algorithm was being redesigned to take
               into account hundreds of other criteria.
                   Above all else, the providers of information algorithms must assert that
               their algorithms are impartial. The performance of algorithmic objectivity
               has become fundamental to the maintenance of these tools as legitimate
               brokers of relevant knowledge. No provider has been more adamant about
               the neutrality of its algorithm than Google, which regularly responds to
               requests to alter its search results with the assertion that the algorithm
               must not be tampered with. Google famously pulled out of China in 2010
               entirely rather than censor its results, though Google had complied with
               China’s rules before, and may have pulled out rather than admit it was
               losing to its Chinese competitors. Despite Google’s stance, it did alter its
               search results when complaints arose about a racist Photoshopped image
               of Michelle Obama at the top of the Image search results; Google provides
               a SafeSearch mechanism for keeping profanity and sexual images from




9042_009.indd 180                                                                                      8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               The Relevance of Algorithms                                                   181



               minors; and the provider refuses to autocomplete search queries that spec-
               ify torrent file-trading services. Yet Google regularly claims that it does not
               alter its index or manipulate its results. Morozov (2011) believes that this is
               a way to deflect responsibility: “Google’s spiritual deferral to ‘algorithmic
               neutrality’ betrays the company’s growing unease with being the world’s
               most important information gatekeeper. Its founders prefer to treat tech-
               nology as an autonomous and fully objective force rather than spending
               sleepless nights worrying about inherent biases in how their systems—sys-
               tems that have grown so complex that no Google engineer fully under-
               stands them—operate.”
                  This assertion of algorithmic objectivity plays in many ways an equiv-
               alent role to the norm of objectivity in Western journalism. Like search
               engines, journalists have developed tactics for determining what is most
               relevant, how to report it, and how to assure its relevance—a set of prac-
               tices that are relatively invisible to their audience, a goal that they admit
               is messier to pursue than it might appear, and a principle that helps set
               aside but does not eradicate value judgments and personal politics. These
               institutionalized practices are animated by a conceptual promise that, in
               the discourse of journalism, is regularly articulated (or overstated) as a
               kind of totem. Journalists use the norm of objectivity as a “strategic ritual”
               (Tuchman 1972), to lend public legitimacy to knowledge production tactics
               that are inherently precarious. “Establishing jurisdiction over the ability to
               objectively parse reality is a claim to a special kind of authority” (Schudson
               and Anderson 2009, 96).
                  Journalist and algorithmic objectivities are by no means the same. Jour-
               nalistic objectivity depends on an institutional promise of due diligence,
               built into and conveyed via a set of norms journalists learned in training
               and on the job; their choices represent a careful expertise backed by a deeply
               infused, philosophical and professional commitment to set aside their own
               biases and political beliefs. The promise of the algorithm leans much less on
               institutional norms and trained expertise, and more on a technologically
               inflected promise of mechanical neutrality. Whatever choices are made are
               presented both as distant from the intervention of human hands, and as
               submerged inside of the cold workings of the machine.
                  But in both, legitimacy depends on accumulated guidelines for the proce-
               duralization of information selection. The discourses and practices of objec-
               tivity have come to serve as a constitutive rule of journalism (Ryfe 2006).
               Objectivity is part of how journalists understand themselves and what it
               means to be a journalist. It is part of how their work is evaluated, by editors,
               colleagues, and their readers. It is a defining signal by which journalists




9042_009.indd 181                                                                                  8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               182                                                                Tarleton Gillespie



               even recognize what counts as journalism. The promise of algorithmic
               objectivity, too, has been palpably incorporated into the working practices
               of algorithm providers, constitutively defining the function and purpose
               of the information service. When Google includes in its “Ten Things We
               Know to Be True” manifesto that “Our users trust our objectivity and no
               short-term gain could ever justify breaching that trust,” this is neither spin
               nor corporate Kool-Aid. It is a deeply ingrained understanding of the public
               character of Google’s information service, one that both influences and
               legitimizes many of its technical and commercial undertakings, and helps
               obscure the messier reality of the service it provides.
                   Still, these claims must compete in the public dialogue with other
               articulations, which may or may not be so friendly to the economic and
               ideological aims of the stakeholders. Bijker (1997) calls these competing
               “technological frames” the discursive characterizations of a technology
               made by groups of actors who also have a stake in that technology’s opera-
               tion, meaning, and social value. What users of an information algorithm
               take it to be, and whether they are astute or ignorant, matters. How the
               press portrays such tools will strengthen or undermine the providers’ care-
               ful discursive efforts. This means that, while the algorithm itself may seem
               to possess an aura of technological neutrality, or to embody populist, meri-
               tocratic ideals, how it comes to appear that way depends not just on its
               design but also on the mundane realities of news cycles, press releases, tech
               blogs, fan discussion, user rebellion, and the machinations of the algorithm
               provider’s competitors.
                   There is a fundamental paradox in the articulation of algorithms. Algo-
               rithmic objectivity is an important claim for a provider, particularly for
               algorithms that serve up vital and volatile information for public consump-
               tion. Articulating the algorithm as a distinctly technical intervention helps
               an information provider answer charges of bias, error, and manipulation.
               At the same time, as can be seen with Google’s PageRank, there is a socio-
               political value in highlighting the populism of the criteria the algorithm
               uses. To claim that an algorithm is a democratic proxy for the web-wide col-
               lective opinion of a particular website lends it authority. And there is com-
               mercial value in claiming that the algorithm returns “better” results than
               its provider’s competitors, which posits customer satisfaction over some
               notion of accuracy (van Couvering 2007). In examining the articulation
               of an algorithm, we should pay particular attention to how this tension
               between technically assured neutrality and the social flavor of the assess-
               ment being made is managed—and, sometimes, where it breaks down.




9042_009.indd 182                                                                                      8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               The Relevance of Algorithms                                                   183



               Entanglement with Practice

               Though they could be studied as abstract computational tools, algorithms
               are built to be embedded into practice in the lived world that produces the
               information they process, and in the lived world of their users (Couldry
               2012). This is especially true when the algorithm is the instrument of a
               business for which the information it delivers (or the advertisements it
               pairs with it) is the commodity. If users fail or refuse to fit that tool into
               their practices, to make it meaningful, that algorithm will fail. This means
               we must consider not their “effect” on people, but a multidimensional
               “entanglement” between algorithms put into practice and the social tac-
               tics of users who take them up. This relationship is, of course, a moving
               target, because algorithms change, and the user populations and activities
               they encounter change as well. Still, this should not imply that there is
               no relationship. As these algorithms have nestled into people’s daily lives
               and mundane information practices, users shape and rearticulate the algo-
               rithms they encounter; and algorithms impinge on how people seek infor-
               mation, how they perceive and think about the contours of knowledge, and
               how they understand themselves in and through public discourse.
                  It is important that we conceive of this entanglement not as a one-direc-
               tional influence, but as a recursive loop between the calculations of the
               algorithm and the “calculations” of people. The algorithm that helps users
               navigate Flickr’s photo archive is built on the archive of photos posted,
               which means it is designed to apprehend and reflect back the choices made
               by photographers. What people do and do not photograph is already a kind
               of calculation, though one that is historical, multivalent, contingent, and
               sociologically informed. But these were not Flickr’s only design impulses;
               sensitivity to photographic practices had to compete with cost, technical
               efficiency, legal obligation, and business imperatives. And the population
               of Flickr users and the types of photos they post changed as the site grew
               in popularity, was forced to compete with Facebook, introduced tiered pric-
               ing, was bought by Yahoo, and so forth.
                  Many Flickr users post photos with the express purpose of having them
               be seen: some are professional photographers looking for employment,
               some are seeking communities of like-minded hobbyists, some are simply
               proud of their work. So just as the algorithm must be sensitive to photogra-
               phers, photographers have an interest in being sensitive to the algorithm,
               aware that being delivered in response to the right search might put their
               photo in front of the right people. Just as Hollywood’s emphasis on specific




9042_009.indd 183                                                                                  8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               184                                                                Tarleton Gillespie



               genres invites screenwriters to write in generic ways,5 the Flickr algorithm
               may induce subtle reorientations of photographers’ practices toward its
               own constructed logic, that is, toward aspiring to photograph in ways
               adherent to certain emergent categories, or orienting their choice of subject
               and composition toward those things the algorithm appears to privilege.
               “What we leave traces of is not the way we were, but a tacit negotiation
               between ourselves and our imagined auditors” (Bowker 2006, 6–7).

               Algorithmically Recognizable
               This tacit negotiation consists first and foremost of the mundane, strategic
               reorientation of practices many users undertake, toward a tool that they
               know could amplify their efforts. There is a powerful and understandable
               impulse for producers of information to make their content, and them-
               selves, recognizable to an algorithm. A whole industry, search engine opti-
               mization (SEO), promises to boost websites to the top of search results. But
               we might think of optimization (deliberate, professional) as just the lead-
               ing edge of a much more varied, organic, and complex process by which
               content producers of all sorts orient themselves toward algorithms. When
               we use hashtags in our tweets—a user innovation that was embraced later
               by Twitter—we are not just joining a conversation or hoping to be read by
               others, we are redesigning our expression so as to be better recognized and
               distributed by Twitter’s search algorithm. Some may work to be noticed by
               the algorithm: teens have been known to tag their status updates with unre-
               lated brand names, in the hopes that Facebook will privilege those updates
               in their friends’ feeds.6 Others may work to evade an algorithm: Napster
               and P2P users sharing infringing copyrighted music were known to slightly
               misspell the artists’ names, so users might find “Britny Speers” recordings
               but the record industry software would not.7
                  Is this gaming the system? Or is it a fundamental way we, to some degree,
               orient ourselves toward the means of distribution through which we hope
               to speak? Based on the criteria of the algorithm in question (or by our best
               estimate of its workings), we make ourselves already algorithmically recogniz-
               able in all sorts of ways. This is not so different than newsmakers orienting
               their efforts to fit the routines of the news industry: timing a press release to
               make the evening broadcast, or providing packaged video to a cable outlet
               hungry for gripping footage, are techniques for turning to face the medium
               that may amplify them. Now, for all of us, social networks and the web
               offer some analogous kind of “mediated visibility” (Thompson 2005, 49),
               and we gain similar benefit by turning to face these algorithms.




9042_009.indd 184                                                                                      8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               The Relevance of Algorithms                                                   185



               Backstage Access
               But who is best positioned to understand and operate the public algorithms
               that matter so much to the public circulation of knowledge? Insight into
               the workings of information algorithms is a form of power: vital to partici-
               pating in public discourse, essential to achieving visibility online, constitu-
               tive of credibility and the opportunities that follow. As mentioned before,
               the criteria and code of algorithms are generally obscured—but not equally
               or from everyone. For most users, their understanding of these algorithms
               may be vague, simplistic, sometimes mistaken; they may attempt to nudge
               the algorithm in ways that are either simply considered best practices
               (hashtags, metadata) or that fundamentally misunderstand the algorithm’s
               criteria (as with repeatedly retweeting the same message in the hopes of
               trending on Twitter). Search engine optimizers and spammers have just as
               little access, but have developed a great deal of technical skill in divining
               the criteria beneath the algorithm through testing and reverse-engineer-
               ing. Communities of technology enthusiasts and critics engage in similar
               attempts to uncover the workings of these systems, whether for fun, insight,
               personal advantage, or determined disruption. Legislators, who have only
               just begun to ask questions about the implications of algorithms for fair
               commerce or political discourse, have thus far been given only the most
               general of explanations: information providers often contend that their
               algorithms are trade secrets that must not be divulged in a public venue.
                   Furthermore, some stakeholders are in fact granted access to the algo-
               rithm, though under controlled conditions. Advertisers are offered one
               kind of access to the backstage workings of that system, for bidding on
               preferred placement. Information providers that offer Application Program-
               ming Interfaces (APIs) to their commercial partners and third-party devel-
               opers give them a glimpse under the hood, but bind them with contracts
               and nondisclosure agreements in the very same moment. Access to, under-
               standing of, and rights regarding the algorithms that play a crucial role in
               public discourse and knowledge will likely change, for different stakehold-
               ers and under specific circumstances—changing also the power to build for,
               navigate through, and regulate these algorithms available to these stake-
               holders and those they represent.

               Domestication
               As much as these tools may urge us to make ourselves legible to them, we
               also take them into our practices, shifting their meaning and sometimes
               even their design along the way. Silverstone (1994) has suggested that once




9042_009.indd 185                                                                                  8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               186                                                                Tarleton Gillespie



               technologies are offered to the public, they undergo a process of “domesti-
               cation”: literally, these technologies enter the home, but also figuratively,
               users make them their own, embedding them in their routines, imbuing
               them with additional meanings that the technology provider could not
               have anticipated. Public information algorithms certainly matter for the
               way users find information, communicate with others, and know the world
               around them. But more than that, users express preferences for their favor-
               ite search engines, opine about a site’s recommendations as being buggy or
               intuitive or spot on. Some users put great stock in a particular tool, while
               others come to distrust it, using it warily or not at all. Apple iPhone users
               swap tips on how to make its Siri search agent speak its repertoire of amus-
               ing retorts,8 then share in the outrage about its answers on hot-button
               political issues.9 Satisfied Facebook users today become critics tomorrow
               when the algorithm behind their news feed is altered in a way that feels
               economically motivated—while through and after the uprising, they con-
               tinue to post status updates. Users, faced with the power asymmetries of
               data collection and online surveillance, have developed an array of tac-
               tics of “obfuscation” to evade or pollute the algorithmic attempts to know
               them (Brunton and Nissenbaum 2011). While it is crucial to consider the
               ways algorithmic tools shape our encounters with information, we should
               not imply that users are under the sway of these tools. The reality is more
               complicated, and more intimate.
                   Users can also turn to these algorithms for a data-inflected reflection;
               many sites allow us to present ourselves to others and back to ourselves,
               including our public profile, the performance of our friendships, the
               expression of our preferences, or a record of our recent activity. Facebook’s
               Timeline feature curates users’ activities into chronological remembrances
               of them; the pleasure of seeing what it algorithmically selects offers a kind
               of delight, a delight beyond composing the photos and news posts in the
               first place. But algorithms can also function as a particularly compelling
               “technology of the self” (Foucault 1988) when they seem to independently
               ratify one’s public visibility. It is now common practice to Google oneself:
               seeing me appear as the top result in a search for my name offers a kind
               of assurance of my tenuous public existence. There is a sense of validation
               when your pet topic trends on Twitter, when Amazon recommends a book
               you already love, or when Apple iTunes’ “Genius” function composes an
               appealing playlist from your library of songs. Whether we actually tailor
               our Amazon purchases so as to appear well read (just as Nielsen ratings
               families used to over-report watching PBS and C-Span) or we simply enjoy
               when the algorithm confirms our sense of self, algorithms are a powerful




9042_009.indd 186                                                                                      8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               The Relevance of Algorithms                                                   187



               invitation to understand ourselves through the independent lens they
               promise to provide.
                  Algorithms are not just what their designers make of them, or what they
               make of the information they process. They are also what we make of them
               day in and day out—but with this caveat: because the logic, maintenance,
               and redesign of these algorithms remain in the hands of the information
               providers, they are in a distinctly privileged position to rewrite our under-
               standing of them, or to engender a lingering uncertainty about their criteria
               that makes it difficult for us to treat the algorithms as truly our own.

               Knowledge Logics
               It is easy to theorize, but substantially more difficult to document, how
               users may shift their worldviews to accommodate the underlying logics
               and implicit presumptions of the algorithms they use regularly. There is a
               case to be made that the working logics of these algorithms not only shape
               user practices, but also lead users to internalize their norms and priori-
               ties: Bucher (2012) argues that the EdgeRank algorithm, used by Facebook
               to determine which status updates get prominently displayed on a users’
               news feed, encourages a “participatory subjectivity” in users, who recog-
               nize that gestures of affinity (such as commenting on a friends’ photo)
               are a key criteria in Facebook’s algorithm. Longford (2005) argues that the
               code of commercial platform “habituates” us, through incessant requests
               and carefully designed default settings, toward giving over more of our
               personal information. Mager (2012) and van Couvering (2010) both pro-
               pose that the principles of capitalism are embedded in the workings of
               search engines.
                   But we need not resort to such muscular theories of ideological dom-
               ination to suggest that algorithms designed to offer relevant knowledge
               also offer ways of knowing—and that as they become more pervasive and
               trusted, their logics are self-affirming. Google’s search engine, amid its 200
               signals, does presume that relevant knowledge is assured largely by public
               ratification, adjusted to weigh heavily the opinions of those who are them-
               selves publicly ratified. This blend of the wisdom of crowds and collec-
               tively certified authorities is Google’s solution to the longstanding tension
               between expertise and common sense, in the enduring problem of how
               to know. It is not without precedent, and it is not a fundamentally flawed
               way to know, but it is a specific one, with its own emphases and myopias.
               Now, Google’s solution is operationalized into a tool that billions of people
               use every day, most of whom experience it as something that simply, and
               unproblematically, “works.” To some degree, Google and its algorithm help




9042_009.indd 187                                                                                  8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               188                                                                Tarleton Gillespie



               assert and normalize this knowledge logic as “right,” as right as its results
               appear to be.

               The Production of Calculated Publics

               Ito, boyd, and others have recently introduced the term “networked pub-
               lics” (boyd 2010; Ito 2008; Varnelis 2008) to highlight both the commu-
               nities of users that can assemble through social media, and the way the
               technologies structure how these publics can form, interact, and sometimes
               fall apart. “While networked publics share much in common with other
               types of publics, the ways in which technology structures them introduces
               distinct affordances that shape how people engage with these environ-
               ments” (boyd 2010, 39). To the extent that algorithms are a key technologi-
               cal component of these mediated environments, they too help structure
               the publics that can emerge using digital technology.
                   Some concerns have been raised about how the workings of informa-
               tion algorithms, and the ways we choose to navigate them, could under-
               mine our efforts to be involved citizens. The ability to personalize search
               results and online news was the first and perhaps best articulated of these
               concerns. With contemporary search engines, the results two users get to
               the same query can be quite different; in a news service or social network,
               the information offerings can be precisely tailored to the user’s preferences
               (by the user, or the provider) such that, in practice, the stories presented
               as most newsworthy may be so dissimilar from user to user that no com-
               mon object of public dialogue is even available. Sunstein (2001) and, more
               recently, Pariser (2011) have argued that, when algorithmic information
               services can be personalized to this degree, the diversity of public knowl-
               edge and political dialogue may be undermined. We are led—by algorithms
               and our own preference for the like-minded—into “filter bubbles” (ibid.),
               where we find only the news we expect and the political perspectives we
               already hold dear.
                   But algorithms not only structure our interactions with others as mem-
               bers of networked publics, they also traffic in calculated publics that they
               themselves produce. When Amazon recommends a book that “customers
               like you” bought, it is invoking and claiming to know a public with which
               we are invited to feel an affinity—though the population on which it bases
               these recommendations is not transparent, and is certainly not cotermi-
               nous with its entire customer base. When Facebook offers as a privacy set-
               ting that a user’s information be seen by “friends, and friends of friends,” it
               transforms a discrete set of users into an audience—it is a group that did not




9042_009.indd 188                                                                                      8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               The Relevance of Algorithms                                                   189



               exist until that moment, and only Facebook knows its precise membership.
               These algorithmically generated groups may overlap with, be an inexact
               approximation of, or have nothing whatsoever to do with the publics that
               the user sought out.
                   Some algorithms go further, making claims about the public they pur-
               port to know, and the users’ place amid them. I have argued elsewhere that
               Twitter’s Trends algorithm promises users a glimpse of what a particular
               public (national or regional) is talking about at that moment, but that it is
               a constructed public, shaped by Twitter’s specific, and largely unspecified
               criteria (Gillespie 2012). Klout, an online service that tracks users’ activ-
               ity and reputation on Facebook, Twitter, and elsewhere, promises to cal-
               culate users’ influence across these various social media platforms. Their
               measures are intuitive in their definition, but completely opaque in their
               mechanisms. The friction between the “networked publics” forged by users
               and the “calculated publics” offered by algorithms further complicates the
               dynamics of networked sociality.
                   With other measures of public opinion, such as polling or surveys, the
               central problem is extrapolation, where a subset is presumed to stand for
               the entire population. With algorithms, the population can be the entire
               user base, sometimes hundreds of millions of people (but only that user
               base the algorithm provider has access to). Instead, the central problem
               here is that the intention behind these calculated representations of the
               public is by no means actuarial. Algorithms that purport to identify what is
               “hot” engage in a calculated approximation of a public through its partici-
               pants’ traceable activity, then report back to them what they have talked
               about most. But behind this, we can ask, What is the gain for providers
               in making such characterizations, and how does that shape what they’re
               measuring? Who is being chosen to be measured in order to produce this
               representation, and who is left out of the calculation? And perhaps most
               important, how do these technologies, now not just technologies of evalu-
               ation but of representation, help to constitute and codify the publics they
               claim to measure, publics that would not otherwise exist except that the
               algorithm called them into existence?
                   These questions matter a great deal, and will matter more, to the extent
               that the representations of the public produced by information algorithms
               get taken up, by users or by authorities, as legitimate, and incorporated
               into the broader modernist project of reflexivity (Giddens 1990). “Society is
               engaged in monitoring itself, scrutinizing itself, portraying itself in a vari-
               ety of ways, and feeding the resulting understandings back into organizing
               its activities” (Boyer and Hannerz 2006, 9). What Twitter claims matters




9042_009.indd 189                                                                                  8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               190                                                                Tarleton Gillespie



               to “Americans” or what Amazon says teens read are forms of authoritative
               knowledge that can and will be invoked by institutions whose aim is to
               regulate such populations.
                  The belief that such algorithms, combined with massive user data, are
               better at telling us things about the nature of the public or the constitution
               of society, has proven alluring for scholars as well. Social science has turned
               eagerly toward computational techniques, or the study of human sociality
               through “big data” (Lazer et al. 2009; for a critique, see boyd and Crawford
               2012), in the hopes of enjoying the kind of insights that the biological sci-
               ences have achieved, by algorithmically looking for needles in the digital
               haystacks of all this data. The approach is seductive: having millions of
               data points lends a great deal of legitimacy, and the way algorithms seem
               to spot patterns that researchers couldn’t see otherwise is exciting. “For a
               certain sort of social scientist, the traffic patterns of millions of e-mails look
               like manna from heaven” (Nature 2007). But this methodological approach
               should heed the complexities described so far, particularly when a research-
               er’s data has been generated by commercial algorithms. Computational
               research techniques are not barometers of the social. They produce hiero-
               glyphs: shaped by the tool by which they are carved, requiring of priestly
               interpretation, they tell powerful but often mythological stories—usually in
               the service of the gods.
                  Finally, when the data is us, what should we make of the associations
               that algorithms claim to identify about us as a society—that we do not
               know, or perhaps do not want to know? In Ananny’s (2011) uncanny
               example, he noticed the Android Market recommending a sex-offender
               location app to users who downloaded Grindr, a location-based social net-
               working tool for gay men. He speculates how the Android Market algo-
               rithms could have made this association—one even the operators of the
               Android Market could not easily explain. Did the algorithm make an error?
               Did the algorithm make too blunt an association, simply pairing apps with
               “sex” in the description? Or did the Android recommendation engine in
               fact identify a subtle association that, though we may not wish it so, is regu-
               larly made in our culture, between homosexuality and predatory behavior?
               Zimmer (2007) notes a similar case: a search for the phrase “she invented”
               would return the query, “did you mean ‘he invented’?” That is, it did so
               until Google changed the results. While unsettling in its gender politics,
               Google’s response was completely “correct,” explained by the sorry fact
               that, over the entire corpus of the web, the word “invented” is preceded by
               “he” much more often than “she.” Google’s algorithm recognized this—
               and mistakenly presumed it meant the search query “she invented” was




9042_009.indd 190                                                                                      8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               The Relevance of Algorithms                                                   191



               merely a typographical error. Google, here, proves much less sexist than we
               are. In a response to Ananny’s example, Gray has suggested that, just as we
               must examine algorithms that make associations such as these, we might
               also inquire into the “cultural algorithms” that these associations represent,
               (that is, systematically associating homosexuality with sexual predation)
               across a massive, distributed set of “data points”—us.

               Conclusion

               Understanding algorithms and their impact on public discourse, then,
               requires thinking not simply about how they work, where they are
               deployed, or what animates them financially. This is not simply a call to
               unveil their inner workings and spotlight their implicit criteria. It is a socio-
               logical inquiry that does not interest the providers of these algorithms, who
               are not always in the best position to even ask. It requires examining why
               algorithms are being looked to as a credible knowledge logic, how they fall
               apart and are repaired when they come in contact with the ebb and flow
               of public discourse, and where political assumptions might not only be
               etched into their design, but also constitutive of their widespread use and
               legitimacy.
                  I see the emergence of the algorithm as a trusted information tool as the
               latest response to a fundamental tension of public discourse. The means
               by which we produce, circulate, and consume information in a complex
               society must necessarily be handled through the division of labor: some
               produce and select information, and the rest of us, at least in that moment,
               can only take it for what it’s worth. Every public medium previous to this
               has faced this challenge, from town criers to newspapers to broadcasting. In
               each, when we turn over the provision of knowledge to others, we are left
               vulnerable to their choices, methods, and subjectivities. Sometimes this is
               a positive, providing expertise, editorial acumen, refined taste. But we are
               also wary of the intervention, of human failings and vested interests, and
               find ourselves with only secondary mechanisms of social trust by which
               to vouch for what is true and relevant (Shapin 1995). Their procedures
               are largely unavailable to us. Their procedures are unavoidably selective,
               emphasizing some information and discarding others, and the choices may
               be consequential. There is the distinct possibility of error, bias, manipula-
               tion, laziness, commercial or political influence, or systemic failures. The
               selection process can always be an opportunity to curate for reasons other
               than relevance: for propriety, for commercial or institutional self-interest,
               or for political gain. Together this represents a fundamental vulnerability,




9042_009.indd 191                                                                                  8/2/13 10:52 AM
                        PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               192                                                                Tarleton Gillespie



               one that we can never fully resolve; we can merely build assurances as best
               we can.
                  From this perspective, we might see algorithms not just as codes with
               consequences, but as the latest, socially constructed and institutionally
               managed mechanism for assuring public acumen: a new knowledge logic.
               We might consider the algorithmic as posed against, and perhaps supplant-
               ing, the editorial as a competing logic. The editorial logic depends on the
               subjective choices of experts, who are themselves made and authorized
               through institutional processes of training and certification, or validated
               by the public through the mechanisms of the market. The algorithmic
               logic, by contrast, depends on the proceduralized choices of a machine,
               designed by human operators to automate some proxy of human judg-
               ment or unearth patterns across collected social traces. Both struggle with,
               and claim to resolve, the fundamental problem of human knowledge: how
               to identify relevant information crucial to the public, through unavoid-
               ably human means, in such a way as to be free from human error, bias, or
               manipulation. Both the algorithmic and editorial approaches to knowledge
               are deeply important and deeply problematic; much of the scholarship on
               communication, media, technology, and publics grapples with one or both
               techniques and their pitfalls.
                  A sociological inquiry into algorithms should aspire to reveal the com-
               plex workings of this knowledge machine, both the process by which it
               chooses information for users and the social process by which it is made into
               a legitimate system. But there may be something, in the end, impenetrable
               about algorithms. They are designed to work without human intervention,
               they are deliberately obfuscated, and they work with information on a scale
               that is hard to comprehend (at least without other algorithmic tools). And
               perhaps more than that, we want relief from the duty of being skeptical
               about information we cannot ever assure for certain. These mechanisms by
               which we settle (if not resolve) this problem, then, are solutions we cannot
               merely rely on, but must believe in. But this kind of faith (Vaidhyanathan
               2011) renders it difficult to soberly recognize their flaws and fragilities.
                  So in many ways, algorithms remain outside our grasp, and they are
               designed to be. This is not to say that we should not aspire to illuminate
               their workings and impact. We should. But we may also need to prepare
               ourselves for more and more encounters with the unexpected and ineffable
               associations they will sometimes draw for us, the fundamental uncertainty
               about who we are speaking to or hearing, and the palpable but opaque
               undercurrents that move quietly beneath knowledge when it is managed
               by algorithms.




9042_009.indd 192                                                                                      8/2/13 10:52 AM
                         PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY



               The Relevance of Algorithms                                                       193



               Acknowledgments

               I want to thank my colleagues at Culture Digitally for their help and advice
               on this essay, and the generous support of the Collegium de Lyon and The
               European Institutes for Advanced Study (EURIAS) Fellowship Programme.

               Notes

               1. Ethan Zuckerman, “Eli Pariser talks about the filter bubble.” The Boston Phoenix,
               May 26, 2011. http://thePhoenix.com/Boston/arts/121405-eli-pariser-talks-about-
               the-filter-bubble/, accessed April 22, 2013.
               2. Google, “Facts about Google and competition,” http://www.google.com/compe-
               tition/howgooglesearchworks.html, accessed April 22, 2013. Google and Bing have
               since engaged in a little competitive “signals” war, first when Bing announced that
               it uses 1,000 signals, and Google following that its 200 signals have as many as 50
               variations, bringing their total nearer to 10,000. See Danny Sullivan, “Dear Bing, we
               have 10,000 ranking signals to your 1,000. Love, Google,” http://searchengineland.
               com/bing-10000-ranking-signals-google-55473, accessed April 22, 2013.

               3. Foregoing the possibility of a perfectly transparent algorithm, there is a range of
               choices open to a developer as to how straightforward to be. This can be as simple as
               being more forthright in the characterization of the tool, or by providing an expla-
               nation for why certain ads were served up with a page, or it could be providing more
               careful site documentation.

               4. Brian Christian, “The A/B Test: Inside the technology that’s changing the rules of
               business.” Wired.com, April 25, 2012. http://www.wired.com/business/2012/04/ff_
               abtesting/, accessed April 22, 2013.

               5. Christian Sandvig, personal communication.

               6. danah boyd, personal communication.

               7. ABC News, “Napster faced with big list, trick names,” March 5, 2001. http://abc-
               news.go.com/Entertainment/story?id=108389, accessed April 22, 2013.

               8. http://siri-sayings.tumblr.com/, accessed April 22, 2013.

               9. Jenna Wortham, “Apple days Siri’s abortion answers are a glitch.” New York
               Times, November 30, 2011. http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/11/30/apple-says-
               siris-abortion-answers-are-a-glitch/, accessed April 22, 2013.




9042_009.indd 193                                                                                       8/2/13 10:52 AM
                    PROPERTY OF MIT PRESS: FOR PROOFREADING AND INDEXING PURPOSES ONLY




9042_009.indd 194                                                                        8/2/13 10:52 AM
