First Monday, Volume 7 Number 4 - 1 April 2002




Much of the existing literature on the digital divide - the differences between the
"haves" and "have nots" regarding access to the Internet - limits its scope to a binary
classification of technology use by only considering whether someone does or does not
use the Internet. To remedy this shortcoming, in this paper I look at the differences in
people's online skills. In order to measure online ability, I assigned search tasks to a
random sample of Internet users from a suburban county in the United States. My
findings suggest that people search for content in a myriad of ways and there is
considerable difference in whether individuals are able to find various types of content
on the Web and a large variance in how long it takes to complete online tasks. Age is
negatively associated with one's level of Internet skill, experience with the technology is
positively related to online skill, and differences in gender do little to explain the
variance in the ability of different people to find content online.

Contents
Introduction: Inequalities in Internet Use
Refining the Current Approach to the Digital Divide
Methods and Data
Differences in Ability to Find Content Online
Conclusion




Introduction: Inequalities in Internet Use
Much of the literature documenting the Internet's spread has focused on the differences
among those who have access to the Internet and those who do not, or the differences
among those who use it and those who do not. Since the National Telecommunications
& Information Administration published its first report "Falling Through the Net: A
Survey of the Have Nots in Rural and Urban America" in 1995, many analyses have
been written on the inequalities of access to and use of the medium. Existing studies of
differential Internet access and use document inequalities among various segments of
the population (Bucy, 2000) with particular attention to education (NTIA, 2000), race
(Hoffman and Novak, 1999), gender (Bimber, 2000), age (Loges and Jung, 2001),
income (Benton Foundation, 1998) and rural residence (Strover, 1999).

These studies have been essential in understanding inequalities in access to the
Internet, or what has come to be known as the "digital divide". Here, I argue that as
the medium spreads to a majority of the population (NTIA, 2002) it is increasingly
important to look at not only who uses the Internet, but also to distinguish varying
levels of online skills among individuals. Skill, in this context, is defined as the ability to
efficiently and effectively find information on the Web. By exploring the differences in
how people use the Web for information retrieval, we can discern if there is a "second-
level digital divide" in the making as the Web spreads to the majority of the American
population. To explore this question, I report findings from a project that explores
people's ability to locate content online. Documenting differences in Web use skills
allows us to distinguish how different kinds of people are able to take advantage of this
medium in varying ways.




Refining the Current Approach to the Digital Divide
While most reports identify differences among various segments of the population, over
time studies emphasize the increasing diffusion of the medium among the population at
large (Howard, Rainie, and Jones, 2001; Katz and Rice, 2002; NTIA 2000, 2002; Pew
Internet and American Life Project, 2000). As more people start using the Web for
communication and information retrieval, it becomes less useful to merely look at binary
classifications of who is online when discussing questions of inequality in relation to the
Internet (DiMaggio and Hargittai, 2001). Rather, we need to start looking at differences
in how those who are online use the medium, that is, differences in people's online
skills. It is important to expand the research agenda to allow analyses of the differences
among Internet users.

Some scholars have offered a refined understanding of the digital divide by suggesting
that there are different levels at which divides exist. Kling (1998) identified differences
in technical access (the physical availability of the technology) and in social access (the
professional knowledge and technical skills necessary to benefit from information
technologies). Norris (2001) pointed to divides at three levels: the global divide which
encompasses differences among industrialized and lesser developed nations; the social
divide which points to inequalities among the population within one nation; and, a
democratic divide which refers to the differences among those who do and do not use
digital technologies to engage and participate in public life. DiMaggio and Hargittai
(2001) suggested five dimensions along which divides may exist:

          1. technical means (software, hardware, connectivity quality);
          2. autonomy of use (location of access, freedom to use the medium for one's
             preferred activities);
          3. use patterns (types of uses of the Internet);
          4. social support networks (availability of others one can turn to for
             assistance with use, size of networks to encourage use); and,
          5. skill (one's ability to use the medium effectively).

The goal of this study is to empirically investigate such refined understandings of a
second-level digital divide by exploring differences in Internet users' online skills.

Information about people's online skills tells us to what extent they are able to use the
medium in ways of most interest to them and in ways that are most useful to their
particular needs. The ability to find different types of information online allows people
to use the medium to their maximum benefit. If users often give up in frustration and
confusion then merely having access does not mean that a digital divide has been
solved because a divide remains in their capacity to effectively use the Internet (Wilson,
2000).

How can we talk about the Internet's effect on political participation if a user does not
possess the skills to find political information? Similarly, how can the Internet prove to
be a useful link between the government and citizens if people are unable to find
official documents online? By measuring users' Internet skills, we can bridge the gap in
the literature between mere structural measures of access and descriptions of what
people do online in order to better describe the differences in online skills among
individuals.




Methods and Data
Sampling

The data presented in this paper are based on in-person observations and interviews
with a random sample of 54 Internet users from the suburban towns and boroughs of a
New Jersey county conducted during the summer and fall of 2001. Respondents were
recruited through random sampling. Potential respondents were first sent a letter via
postal mail explaining the project and requesting participation. They were also sent a
brochure that presented more details about the study. People were also pointed to the
study's Web site (www.webuse.org) for more information and were given the option of
calling/writing the researcher to schedule an appointment. A few days after the letters
had been sent, the households were contacted by telephone.

The eligible adult (i.e. Internet user adult over 18) with the next nearest birthday was
selected in order to randomly sample from within households. If this randomly selected
person from the household was not willing to participate then the household was coded
as a refusal even if another member of the household would have been willing to take
part in the study. Such strict measures of random selection assure that the participants
of the study represent a truly random sample of the area's Internet user population.
People who were identified as Web users were invited to participate in the study. Web
users are defined as people who go online at least once every month for more than
using e-mail. This is a low threshold for including people in the study; it is used to
maximize variance in experience.

Respondents were offered $40 for their participation, which they received after the
study session. Respondents were asked to come to the research site on the university
campus and were offered assistance with transportation if they could not provide their
own (one respondent took advantage of this option and was reimbursed for bus fare).
The study's response rate was 64 percent, considerably high given the time cost
involved in participation.

Studying how people find information online

Researchers in the library and information science community have conducted analyses
on how people locate content online, but their projects limit their scope to people in
particular academic communities (e.g. graduate students in information science
programs (Wang, Hawk and Tenopir, 2000) or, at best, college students in general
(Cothey, 2002)) making their findings impossible to generalize to the broader Internet
user population (see Jansen and Pooch, 2001 for a review of the literature on Web
searches). Moreover, these studies focus on the technicalities of searches - such as the
number of search terms used in a search query - without exploring demographic
variables that contribute to differences in how people find material online.

Information about subjects' usual Internet use and history as well as data on their
demographic background were collected via surveys. People's ability to locate content
on the Web was measured by giving respondents tasks to perform online. I analyzed
the results of the following five tasks. Individuals were asked to find:

          1. Information about local cultural events in the area such as art shows,
             musical performances, theatre shows or movies;
          2. Music they could listen to online;
          3. A Web site comparing different presidential candidates' views on abortion;
          4. Tax forms; and,
          5. Art by kids.

These tasks were chosen to explore people's ability to find information on the Web in
different topical domains. They explore whether users can find locally relevant content,
can take advantage of the multimedia nature of the Web, can use the Web for political
purposes, for government information, and for a random task such as finding children's
art online. The last task proved to be useful in that it was new to all users and thus was
able to control for people's previous experiences with any given task.

Respondents were given the choice of using a PC or a Mac so they could use the
platform with which they are most familiar. The three most popular browsing software
applications were all available on both machines; Internet Explorer, Netscape
Communicator, and America Online to allow respondents to replicate their usual online
experiences. The computers connected to the Internet on a high-speed university
network line. Additionally, a program called Don't Panic (Panicware, 2001) was used to
erase the browser and URL history on each browser program so that each respondent
started out with a clean slate and was not influenced by previous users' actions. The
search sessions were recorded with the Hypercam screen capture program (or
SnapZPro on the Mac) that generated audio-visual files of the entire search sessions.
The whole screen was captured with every action - e.g. click of the mouse, scrolling -
and every verbal comment the respondent made during the search. These files were
then analyzed to measure whether people successfully completed a task and how much
time (in seconds) they spent on each task. This is the outcome of interest in this study:
Skill is operationalized as success and time to completion of a task.

The researcher sat behind to the left of the respondent and refrained from influencing
the respondents' strategies (e.g. never suggested any particular online actions, did not
answer questions about spelling or whether a certain click would be useful).
Respondents were encouraged to look for the information until they found it. No one
was cut off from pursuing a search. In some cases when respondents looked frustrated
or agitated they were given the option of moving on. However, when a subject simply
stated that he or she was unable to perform a certain task, that person was encouraged
to try several times nonetheless. When the subject suggested multiple times that they
would not be able to complete a search, they were read the next task (Hargittai (in
press) describes the study methodology in more detail).

The sample

Respondents range in age from 18-81 (see Table 1 for details). Half of the sample is
male. Fifty-five percent of the respondents work full time and an additional 15 percent
work part-time. Their occupations range from real-estate agents, environmental policy
analysts, blue-collar workers to office assistants, teachers, service employees and
medical professionals in addition to students, unemployed and retired persons. See the
Appendix for a complete list of participants' demographic characteristics including their
occupations.



                Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for Independent Variables
     a
         Education and Family income have no means as those variables were collected categorically.


                                        Standard
                            Mean                          Median          Minimum          Maximum
                                        Deviation

          Age               43.06          16.37             41.5              18               81

                                                                           Less than
   Educationa                N/A            N/A            College                             Ph.D.
                                                                          high school

                                                          $80,000-         $17,500-
Family Incomea               N/A            N/A                                            >$250,000
                                                          $89,000          $19,000

Number of years
since first use of           6.24          3.54               6                0                16
  the Internet

Number of hours
 browsing the                8.55          10.76              5           8 minutes             70
  Web weekly




Eighty-nine percent of the respondents are White, there are four African Americans and
one Asian American respondent, one person chose the "other" category for race; there
is one Hispanic participant. Eleven percent live without another adult in the household,
45 percent live with a spouse, the rest live with roommates or others (parents in most
cases). Eighty-two percent of the respondents have children. Of these 28 people, 53.5
percent (15 people) have children currently living with them.

On average, participants in this study are more educated than the general Internet user
population as 26 percent have less than a college degree (among whom six are still
enrolled in school), a third hold a college degree and the remaining 40 percent have a
graduate degree. This suggests that findings from the study will be conservative with
respect to effects of different educational levels on people's ability to use the Internet
effectively.
The family income of respondents is greater than the national average although it is
important to note that this county is one of the highest income counties in the country
and thus despite the high median income, the sample is not out of the ordinary for the
local population. The average median per capita income in this county in 2000 was
almost $40,000 (based on U.S. Census data). Here, I look at family income, which is
likely to be considerably higher on average. See Table 1 for descriptive statistics of the
family income distribution. Respondents differ in their political leaning with 20 percent
self-identified as conservative, 30 percent claiming to be middle of the road and half
identifying as liberal.

Regarding Web use frequency and history, the group is diverse. Respondents were
asked how much time they spend on the Web each week excluding e-mail use, that is,
time spent specifically for browsing information online. Web use ranges from just a few
minutes to over 30 hours weekly (see Table 1 for details). About half of the
respondents use the Web more than they use e-mail, 18.5 percent use the two types of
online services the same amount and the rest do more e-mailing than Web browsing in
a typical week.

The group is similarly diverse in its overall experience with the medium. Users were
asked to note when they first started using the Internet. One person went online the
year of the study with an additional 18.5 percent only having used it for two years or
less. However, many - 39 percent - of the subjects had been users for 5-7 years. There
are also several long-term users among the respondents with 18.5 percent having used
the Internet for more than ten years (see Table 1 for details).




Differences in Ability to Find Content Online
I measure people's online skills in two ways. First, the binary success/failure rate shows
what portion of the respondents was able to complete a certain task. Second, the time
to completion of each task is measured in seconds to show the gradual differences in
how long people take to find information on the Web. The exact time spent on each
task is recorded for every respondent so information is available both on when
respondents successfully completed a task and when they decided to give up on a task.

There is some variance in the success rate for performing tasks and a large variance in
the amount of time used to complete tasks. Half of respondents (27 individuals) were
able to successfully complete all tasks and an additional 31.5 percent (17 people)
succeeded in locating four of the five types of information sought (see Table 2 for
details). However, the remaining ten people were only able to successfully complete 1-3
tasks. This is a considerable proportion given that people were encouraged to pursue
tasks without any time constraint. Table 3 describes in detail what proportion of
respondents was successful for each task with additional information on the amount of
time people took to successfully complete each task.



               Table 2: Number of Successfully Completed Tasks
                                        (N=54)


                                                      Number of Respondents
     Number of Tasks Completed Successfully
                                                        (% in parentheses)

                           1                                     1 (2)

                           2                                    3 (5.5)

                           3                                    6 (11)

                           4                                  17 (31.5)

                           5                                   27 (50)


 Table 3: Success Rate and Average Time to Successful Completion by Task


            Success                                          Maximum
                        Mean      Standard       Minimum                       N
 Task        Rate                                              Time
                       (mins)     Deviation        Time                    (success)
             (%)                                              (min)

 Music       94.44       1.55        1.67           5s           7.83          51

  Tax
             94.44       2.48        2.04          27s           8.75          51
 forms

 Local
             87.04       2.18        2.03          24s           9.78          47
events

 Kids'
             85.19       2.09        1.67          11s           8.05          46
  art

Political
             61.11       3.79        3.10          27s          13.53          33
  info
Note the low rate of successful completion (61 percent) for the task that required
respondents to find a Web site that compares different presidential candidates' views on
abortion. To control for previous experience with such a task, respondents were also
asked if they had looked at political campaign information online before. Among those
who had not, 54.2 percent completed the task successfully in contrast to the 66.7
percent among those who had experience with looking for this type of content online.
Although there is some difference among those who had previous experience with this
task and those who did not, there are significant proportions of people in both
categories who lacked the skill to successfully complete this task.

This finding has important implications when considering the potential effects of the
Internet on political participation and its ability to inform citizens on political issues. A
large percentage of users were unable to find a political comparison Web site even in a
situation where they are not constrained by time and are not being distracted by other
obligations and activities. This suggests that people have a very hard time finding
political information that may be helpful to further their understandings of candidates'
views in a political campaign. Although there are numerous resources on the Web that
showcase this type of information, the mere presence of such content will be of little
use to advancing political participation if people are not capable of finding their way to
such sites.

Overall, people spent anywhere from two and a half minutes to 33 minutes on the five
tasks regardless of whether they were able to successfully complete them or not. Figure
1 shows the cumulative distribution function of the total time spent on all tasks. The y
axis denotes the proportion of people still working on a task and the x axis shows the
amount of total time spent on searching. The circles on the graph signify the amount of
time the respondent took to search for the five types of content on the Web.
                   Figure 1: Total Time Spent on All Five Tasks



There is a gradual increase in the amount of time people spent on all the tasks. Half of
respondents were done in 12 minutes or less (so on average these people spent 2.4 or
less minutes on each task), but the rest took longer, spending as much as 33 minutes
on the tasks. Four respondents spent less than a total of five minutes on all tasks
whereas four respondents spent more than 30 minutes on the five tasks.

The large variance is not simply due to people searching endlessly without successful
completion resulting in lengthy search sessions. Figure 2 shows the distribution of time
spent on the five tasks for those 27 respondents who successfully completed all five
tasks. Their times-to-completion range from 2.5 minutes to 30.3 minutes suggesting
that the quickest respondent successful with all tasks was as much as twelve times
quicker than the slowest fully successful respondent.
  Figure 2: Total Time Spent on All Tasks for Those Successful with All Five
                                    Tasks



How can we explain these differences in people's ability to find content online? Here, I
look at the relationship between online skills and age, gender, education, and
experience with the technology. I consider both the mean number of successfully
completed tasks by subgroups and the average amount of time (in minutes) spent on
all five tasks. I report time spent on all five tasks regardless of successful completion.
The results are robust when only considering the total time of those who were
successful with all five tasks.

Age

There are clear generational differences in people's ability to use the Web. Table 4
shows the average number of successfully completed tasks by age broken down by
decades. The 18 and 19 year olds were all successful with all five tasks whereas the
people in their 70s and 80s averaged 3.33 successful tasks with people in their 60s also
able to finish less than four tasks on average. The same table also presents information
about the average time people spent on the five tasks broken down by age in decades.
Again we see clear generational differences. People in their teens and people in their
20s are quicker than people in their 30s and 40s who are quicker than older
respondents, although curiously, people in their 60s were relatively quick at finishing
tasks.



Table 4: Average Number of Successfully Completed Tasks and Time Spent on
                              Tasks by Age


                                            Average
              Mean         Standard                       Standard
Age by                                      Time on                        Number of
             Number        Deviation                      Deviation
Decade                                       Tasks                        Observations
             of Tasks      of Tasks                        of Time
                                             (min)

  10s            5            0.00             6.7            3.96               3

  20s          4.67           0.49             8.2            3.97               12

  30s          4.17           1.33            15.7            6.11               6

  40s          4.21           0.58            14.0            6.94               14

  50s          4.13           1.13            19.1            8.44               8

  60s          3.75           1.49            13.5            6.49               8

 70s+          3.33           1.15            24.4            7.50               3




Gender

On average, women completed 4.19 tasks compared to men's 4.26 average success
rate. The average total time spent on the five tasks for women was 14.6 minutes
whereas for men it was 12.9 minutes. Neither of these differences is statistically
significant, suggesting that there is no influence of gender on whether people are able
to efficiently navigate the content of the Web and how long they take to do so.

Education

Education has consistently been a predictor of access to the Internet (NTIA 1995, 1998,
1999, 2000) and is likely to affect the level of Web use skill as well. Universities were
the first ones to embrace the technology and thus those who attended college in the
past decade would have had exposure to the medium during their schooling. Moreover,
people with higher levels of education are likely to have had more exposure to
computer technology in general, familiarity with which is an important first step in
gaining access to the Internet. Moreover, higher educated individuals are more likely to
possess the expertise and confidence with technology needed to download and install
additional software, a necessary prerequisite for the browsing of many Web sites.

Here, respondents' level of education is broken down into three categories: less than a
college degree, college degree and graduate degree. Table 5A shows the relationship of
educational level to online skills. Those with the highest level of education do best in
terms of the number of tasks completed while those with the lowest level of education
are the quickest in completing tasks.



Table 5A: Average Number of Successfully Completed Tasks and Time Spent
                        on Tasks by Education


                                            Average
                Mean        Standard                      Standard
                                            Time on                       Number of
Education      Number       Deviation                     Deviation
                                             Tasks                       Observations
               of Tasks     of Tasks                       of Time
                                             (min)

No college
                 4.43           .94           10.4           5.13              14
 degree

  College
                 3.78           1.21          18.4           8.44              18
  degree

 Graduate
                 4.45           .67           12.0           6.42              22
  degree




However, because those currently in school are likely to have quite a bit of exposure to
the technology, and because they would show up in an educational category that does
not yet represent the degree they are currently seeking, in Table 5B, I present the
relationship between education and online skill excluding those respondents who are
currently in school (six college students and one graduate student were thus excluded
from this table). Here, we see that those with a graduate degree do best both with
successful completion of tasks and amount of time spent on tasks.
In the last column of this table, I have included the average age of those in the three
educational subcategories because we have seen earlier that age is significantly related
to level of Web skill. Consistent with that finding, we find that the relationship of
education to skill noted in this table may be driven by the considerable differences in
the average age of those who have no college degree (40) and those who do (48 for
the college graduates and 47 for those with an advanced degree). The higher level of
skill in the lowest educational category may thus be driven by the considerably lower
average age of those respondents. Since the average age is similar for the latter two
categories they are more comparable (as this controls for differences in age). We can
see that those with a graduate degree are considerably better at finding information
online than those who do not have an advanced degree when controlling for age.



Table 5B: Average Number of Successfully Completed Tasks by Education and
          Time Spent on Tasks Excluding Those Currently in School


                                                                            Mean Age
                        Standar     Averag     Standar
             Mean                                                               in
                           d        e Time        d         Number of
Educati      Numb                                                           Education
                        Deviati       on       Deviati      Observatio
  on         er of                                                              al
                         on of      Tasks       on of          ns
             Tasks                                                          Subcatego
                         Tasks       (min)      Time
                                                                               ry

   No
 college      4.125       1.13        12.9        3.89            8              40
 degree

 College
              3.78        1.21        18.4        8.44           18              48
 degree

Graduate
              4.42         .68        12.3        6.45           21              47
 degree




Prior experience with the technology

The amount of prior experience with the Internet is likely to affect online actions
(Howard, Rainie, and Jones, 2001). People who spend more time online - whether at
home or any other location - will likely acquire more knowledge about the Web and
thus will have better online skills. Moreover, people who have been Internet users for
longer are expected to be better at finding information online as they have more
experiences to draw on. Additionally, early adopters tend to be more innovative, with a
greater willingness to explore a new medium and familiarize themselves with it
(Howard, Rainie, and Jones, 2001; Rogers, 1995).

The data suggest that the amount of time people spend online does affect their
efficiency in finding information on the Web but is of most concern for those who use it
minimally. According to Table 6, those who browse the Web less than an hour each
week are able to find less information and take considerably longer on tasks than those
who spend either 1-7 hours online per week or those who spend even more time
surfing the Web weekly.



Table 6: Average Number of Successfully Completed Tasks and Time Spent on
                     Tasks by Time on Web Weekly


                                            Average
                Mean        Standard                      Standard
                                            Time on                       Number of
Education      Number       Deviation                     Deviation
                                             Tasks                       Observations
               of Tasks     of Tasks                       of Time
                                             (min)

 Less than
                 3.20           1.78          18.9           8.37               5
 one hour

1-<7 hours       4.22           .93           13.7           7.90              27

7 or more
                 4.45           .67           12.7           6.80              22
  hours




Table 7 sheds light on the importance of being a veteran versus a newcomer online.
Those who only recently started using the Internet - in the past three years - exhibit
considerably lower online skills than those who have been online for longer. However,
note again the age distribution among the subcategories. Late adopters are significantly
older and so it may be a combination of age and time that is driving the differences in
Web use skills.



Table 7: Average Number of Successfully Completed Tasks and Time Spent on
             Tasks by Number of Years Since First Internet Use
Numbe
  r of
 Years                 Standar       Averag     Standar
            Mean                                                               Mean Age
 Since                    d          e Time        d          Number of
            Numb                                                                   in
 First                 Deviatio        on       Deviatio      Observatio
            er of                                                              Subcatego
Use of                   n of        Tasks        n of           ns
            Tasks                                                                 ry
  the                   Tasks         (min)      Time
Intern
   et

  0-2
             3.18         1.25        19.6         6.01            11               52
 years

  3-6
             4.47          .61        14.3         7.67            19               41
 years

  7 or
 more        4.50          .78        10.6         6.56            24               40
 years




Conclusion
In general, young people (late teens and twenties) have a much easier time getting
around online than their older counterparts (whether people in their 30s or 70s). Some
of this is clearly based on comfort with the technology they are using and not
necessarily based on elaborate techniques they have mastered specifically with respect
to the Web. As the amount of time people have been Internet users also matters in
how well individuals are able to navigate the content of the Web, it is possible that
those who are currently less skilled will learn over time and improve their ability to find
content online. However, people may be discouraged by the difficulties of finding
information on the Web and thus may end up spending less time with the medium.
Given that time spent on the Web is also associated with level of Web skill, lower level
skills may persist over time.

It is clear from the findings that there is great deal of variance in abilities to locate
content online. Merely offering people a network-connected machine will not ensure
that they can use the medium to meet their needs because they may not be able to
maximally take advantage of all that the Web has to offer. Policy decisions that aim to
reduce inequalities in access to and use of information technologies must take into
consideration the necessary investment in training and support as well. Like education
in general, it is not enough to give people a book, we also have to teach them how to
read in order to make it useful. Similarly, it is not enough to wire all communities and
declare that everyone now has equal access to the Internet. People may have technical
access, but they may still continue to lack effective access in that they may not know
how to extract information for their needs from the Web. Although providing Internet
access may help alleviate some problems of the digital divide, information presented in
this paper demonstrates that a second-level digital divide exists relative to specific
abilities to effectively use the medium.




About the Author
Eszter Hargittai earned her BA in Sociology at Smith College and is currently a PhD
candidate in Sociology at Princeton University. She has published on the comparative
history of the radio's and Internet's early years, inequalities in the global diffusion of the
Internet, how portal sites channel users toward some content and away from other
online material, analysis of international telephone networks, and on conceptualizing
the "digital divide". Her current project is an empirical look at how people find
information online and how the organization and presentation of content on the Web
influences people's online actions. She has recently launched an e-mail distribution list -
"Eszter's List" - with pointers to interesting material on the Web. For more information,
see http://www.eszter.com.
E-mail: eszter@eszter.com




Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Paul DiMaggio for his insightful comments throughout this project,
Stan Katz for his ongoing support, and Erica Field for helpful discussions. I am also
grateful to Edward Freeland, James Chu, Carolyn Mordas, Jeremy Davis-Turak, and
Inna Barmash for their assistance with various components of the project. Generous
support from the Markle Foundation is kindly acknowledged. The project has also been
supported in part by NSF grant #SES9819907, a grant from the Russell Sage
Foundation, and through a grant from the Pew Charitable Trusts to the Center for Arts
and Cultural Policy Studies, Princeton University. I am also grateful to the Fellowship of
Woodrow Wilson Scholars at Princeton University.
References
Benton Foundation, 1998. "Losing Ground Bit by Bit: Low-Income Communities in the
Information Age," at http://www.benton.org/Library/Low-Income/, accessed 25 March
2002.

B. Bimber, 2000. "The Gender Gap on the Internet," Social Science Quarterly, volume
81, number 3, pp. 868-876.

E.P. Bucy, 2000. "Social Access to the Internet," Harvard International Journal of
Press/Politics, volume 5, number 1, pp. 50-61.

V. Cothey, 2002. "A Longitudinal Study of World Wide Web Users' Information-
Searching Behavior," Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, volume 53, number 2, pp. 67-78.

P. DiMaggio and E. Hargittai, 2001. "From the 'digital divide' to 'digital inequality':
Studying Internet use as penetration increases," Princeton University Center for Arts
and Cultural Policy Studies, Working Paper Series number 15.

E. Hargittai, in press. "Beyond logs and surveys: In-depth measures of people's Web
use skills," Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology
Perspectives.

D.L. Hoffman and T.P. Novak, 1999. "The Evolution of the Digital Divide: Examining the
Relationship of Race to Internet Access and Usage Over Time," at
http://ecommerce.vanderbilt.edu/research/papers/pdf/manuscripts/EvolutionDigitalDivid
e-pdf.pdf/, accessed 25 March 2002.

P.E.N. Howard, L. Rainie, and S. Jones, 2001. "Days and Nights on the Internet: The
Impact of a Diffusing Technology," American Behavioral Scientist, volume 45, number 3
(November), pp. 383-404.

B.J. Jansen and U. Pooch, 2001. "A Review of Web Searching Studies and a Framework
for Future Research," Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, volume 52, number 3, pp. 235-246.

J.E. Katz and R.E. Rice, 2002. Social Consequences of Internet Use: Access,
Involvement and Interaction. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

R. Kling, 1998. "Technological and Social Access on Computing, Information and
Communication Technologies," White Paper for Presidential Advisory Committee on
High-Performance Computing and Communications, Information Technology, and the
Next Generation Internet, at http://www.slis.indiana.edu/kling/pubs/NGI.htm, accessed
26 March 2002.

W.E. Loges and J.-Y. Jung, 2001. "Exploring the Digital Divide: Internet Connectedness
and Age," Communication Research, volume 28, number 4 (August), pp. 536-562.

National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 1995. "Falling Through
the Net: A Survey of the "Have Nots" in Rural and Urban America," at
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/fallingthru.html, accessed 25 March 2002.

National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 1998. "Falling Through
the Net II: New Data on the Digital Divide," at
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/net2/falling.html, accessed 25 March 2002.

National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 1999. "Falling through
the net: Defining the digital divide," at
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/fttn99/contents.html, accessed 25 March 2002.

National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 2000. "Falling Through
the Net: Toward Digital Inclusion," at
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/fttn00/contents00.html, accessed 25 March 2002.
National Telecommunications and Information Administration, 2002. "A Nation Online:
How Americans Are Expanding Their Use of the Internet," at
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/dn/html/anationonline2.htm, accessed 25 March
2002.

P. Norris, 2001. Digital Divide: Civic Engagement, Information Poverty and the Internet
in Democratic Societies. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Panicware, Inc., 2001. "Don't Panic! 4.0," at http://www.panicware.com/, accessed 25
March 2002.

Pew Internet and American Life Project, 2000. "Tracking Online Life: How Women Use
the Internet to Cultivate Relationships with Family and Friends," at
http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/pdfs/Report1.pdf, accessed 25 March 2002.

E. Rogers, 1995. Diffusion of Innovations. New York: Free Press.

S. Strover, 1999. "Rural Internet Connectivity," at
http://www.rupri.org/pubs/archive/reports/1999/P99-13/, accessed 25 March 2002.

P. Wang, W.B. Hawk and C. Tenopir, 2000. "Users' Interactions with World Wide Web
Resources: An Exploratory Study Using a Holistic Approach," Information Processing
and Management, volume 36, number 2, pp. 229-251.
E.J. Wilson, 2000. "Closing the Digital Divide: An Initial Review," at
http://www.internetpolicy.org/briefing/ErnestWilson0700.html, accessed 25 March
2002.



                        Appendix: Demographics of Respondents
Education: <HS = less than high school; HS/GED = high school or equivalency exam; SC = some college;
ASD = associates degree; BA = bachelor's degree (either arts or sciences); MA = Master's (either arts or
                    sciences); PRO = professional degree; PhD = doctoral degree
                             a
                               African American;bAsian American;c Hispanic


                                                                                        Number of
                                                                     Time on            Years Since
       Occupation                Age     Sex      Education         Web/week            First Use of
                                                                    (in hours)              the
                                                                                         Internet

          Student                 18       F        HS/GED                 3                   7

         At homea                 18       F        HS/GED                10                   5

      Library office
                                  19       F           SC                 10                   4
    assistant/Student

  Accounting manager
                                  20       F           SC                  2                  11
   assistant/Student

      Sales data
                                  20       F           SC                 4.5                  7
    manager/Student

 Bank customer service
                                  21       F           SC                  5                   4
 representative/Student

   Computer lab tech
                                  22       M           SC                 70                   7
    support/Student

 Financial markets data
                                  24       M           BA                 30                   5
       managerc

 Financial services sales
                                  24       M           BA                 21                   6
     representative
   Financial analyst       25   M    BA       1     11

      Golf course
                           26   M   HS/GED   7.5    2
    groundskeeper

    Hydrogeologist         26   F    BA       5     7

Non-profit administrator   26   F    MA       6     7

   Graduate student
                           27   M    PhD     10     11
     (humanities)a

     Civil engineer        29   M    BA      17.5   6

   U.S. military pilot     33   M    MA       7     6

 Non-profit computer
                           34   M    MA      25     7
    programmerb

 Local government GIS
                           36   F    MA      15     6
     administrator

 Assembly worker (air
                           39   M    <HS     0.13   1
    conditioners)a

  Small company MIS
                           39   M   HS/GED    7     6
        director

        At home            39   F    BA      .17    1

  Self-employed real-
                           40   F    ASD     1.5    2
      estate agent

   Medical equipment
                           40   M    BA      10     11
 repair and installation

        At home            40   M    MA       4     9

Professor (mathematics)    40   M    PhD      8     9

   Circulating nurse       41   F    ASD      9     8
 Legal researcher for
                          41   M   PRO    5     8
         State

     Unemployed           42   F   MA    21     8

    Security officer      42   M   PRO    4     3

 Personal/professional
    concierge (self-      43   F   BA    8.5    2
      employed)

     Retail data
                          44   F   BA    0.25   2
    administratora

    Self-employed
                          44   F   MA     7     5
      consultant

    Environmental
                          45   M   MA     3     5
      consultant

    School teacher        47   F   MA     3     10

Social work supervisor    48   F   MA     1     6

   Sales accountant       50   M   BA     5     5

Professor (humanities)    50   F   PhD   0.5    13

Utility company budget
                          50   M   BA     5     7
         analystc

Retail customer service   52   F   MA     4     4

Management consultant
                          52   M   MA    10     16
 (comp info systems)

 Technician manager       55   M   ASD   3.5    12

Business development      56   M   BA    3.5    4

        Retired           57   F   MA     5     11
  Development officer         60      M         PhD              7.5               8

  Personal assistant to
                              62      F         ASD              18                7
      psychologist

         Retired              62      M         MA               14                3

         Retired              63      F         BA                3                2

    Crisis counselor          64      F         BA               0.5               2

   Real estate broker         66      M         BA               15                2

Pharmaceutical products
                              68      F         BA                1                2
 customer support rep.

 Retired (was: scientific
                              69      M         PhD              10                6
  equipment marketer)

            -                 72      F         BA               10                13

 Software programmer          72      M         BA               3.5               5

    Store sales staff
(formerly company tech        81      M         BA                1                0
         staff)



Editorial history
Paper received 21 March 2002; accepted 25 March 2002.




Copyright ©2002, First Monday

Second-Level Digital Divide: Differences in People's Online Skills by Eszter Hargittai
First Monday, volume 7, number 4 (April 2002),
URL: http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue7_4/hargittai/index.html
